# 03-seconds-to-minutes-before

N
Three
Seconds to Minutes Before
othing comes from nothing. No brain is an island.
Thanks to messages bouncing around your brain, a command has
been sent to your muscles to pull that trigger or touch that arm. Odds are that a
short time earlier, something outside your brain prompted this to happen, raising
this chapter’s key questions: (a) What outside stimulus, acting through what
sensory channel and targeting which parts of the brain, prompted this? (b) Were
you aware of that environmental stimulus? (c) What stimuli had your brain made
you particularly sensitive to? And, of course, (d) what does this tell us about our
best and worst behaviors?
Varied sensory information can prompt the brain into action. This can be
appreciated by considering this variety in other species. Often we’re clueless
about this because animals can sense things in ranges that we can’t, or with
sensory modalities we didn’t know exist. Thus, you must think like the animal to
learn what is happening. We’ll begin by seeing how this pertains to the field of
ethology, the science of interviewing an animal in its own language.
E
UNIVERSAL RULES VERSUS KNOBBY KNEES
thology formed in Europe in the early twentieth century in response to an
American brand of psychology, “behaviorism.” Behaviorism descended
from the introduction’s John Watson; the field’s famed champion was B. F.
Skinner. Behaviorists cared about universalities of behavior across species. They
worshipped a doozy of a seeming universal concerning stimulus and response:
rewarding an organism for a behavior makes the organism more likely to repeat
that behavior, while failure to get rewarded or, worse, punishment for it, makes
the organism less likely to repeat it. Any behavior can be made more or less
common through “operant conditioning” (a term Skinner coined), the process of
controlling the rewards and punishments in the organism’s environment.
Thus, for behaviorists (or “Skinnerians,” a term Skinner labored to make
synonymous) virtually any behavior could be “shaped” into greater or lesser
frequency or even “extinguished” entirely.
If all behaving organisms obeyed these universal rules, you might as well
study a convenient species. Most behaviorist research was done on rats or,
Skinner’s favorite, pigeons. Behaviorists loved data, no-nonsense hard numbers;
these were generated by animals pressing or pecking away at levers in “operant
conditioning boxes” (aka “Skinner boxes”). And anything discovered applied to
any species. A pigeon is a rat is a boy, Skinner preached. Soulless droid.*
Behaviorists were often right about behavior but wrong in really important
ways, as many interesting behaviors don’t follow behaviorist rules.*1 Raise an
infant rat or monkey with an abusive mother, and it becomes more attached to
her. And behaviorist rules have failed when humans love the wrong abusive
person.
Meanwhile, ethology was emerging in Europe. In contrast with
behaviorism’s obsession with uniformity and universality of behavior,
ethologists loved behavioral variety. They’d emphasize how every species
evolves unique behaviors in response to unique demands, and how one had to
open-mindedly observe animals in their natural habitats to understand them
(“Studying rat social behavior in a cage is like studying dolphin swimming
behavior in a bathtub” is an ethology adage). They’d ask, What, objectively, is
the behavior? What triggered it? Did it have to be learned? How did it evolve?
What is the behavior’s adaptive value? Nineteenth-century parsons went into
nature to collect butterflies, revel in the variety of wing colors, and marvel at
what God had wrought. Twentieth-century ethologists went into nature to collect
behavior, revel in its variety, and marvel at what evolution had wrought. In
contrast to lab coat–clad behaviorists, ethologists tromped around fields in
hiking shoes and had fetching knobby knees.*
Sensory Triggers of Behavior in Some Other Species
Using an ethological framework, we now consider sensory triggers of
behavior in animals.*2 First there’s the auditory channel. Animals vocalize to
intimidate, proclaim, and seduce. Birds sing, stags roar, howler monkeys howl,
orangutans give territorial calls audible for miles. As a subtle example of
information being communicated, when female pandas ovulate, their
vocalizations get higher, something preferred by males. Remarkably, the same
shift and preference happens in humans.
There are also visual triggers of behavior. Dogs crouch to invite play, birds
strut their plumage, monkeys display their canines menacingly with “threat
yawns.” And there are visual cues of cute baby–ness (big eyes, shortened
muzzle, round forehead) that drive mammals crazy, motivating them to care for
the kid. Stephen Jay Gould noted that the unsung ethologist Walt Disney
understood exactly what alterations transformed rodents into Mickey and
Minnie.*3
Then there are animals signaling in ways we can’t detect, requiring creativity
to interview an animal in its own language.4 Scads of mammals scent mark with
pheromones—odors that carry information about sex, age, reproductive status,
health, and genetic makeup. Some snakes see in infrared, electric eels court with
electric songs, bats compete by jamming one another’s feeding echolocation
signals, and spiders identify intruders by vibration patterns on their webs. How
about this: tickle a rat and it chirps ultrasonically as its mesolimbic dopamine
system is activated.
Back to the rhinencephalon/limbic system war and the resolution ethologists
already knew: for a rodent, emotion is typically triggered by olfaction. Across
species the dominant sensory modality—vision, sounds, whichever—has the
most direct access to the limbic system.
Under the Radar: Subliminal and Unconscious Cuing
It’s easy to see how the sight of a knife, the sound of a voice calling your
name, a touch on your hand can rapidly alter your brain.5 But crucially, tons of
subliminal sensory triggers occur—so fleeting or minimal that we don’t
consciously note them, or of a type that, even if noted, seems irrelevant to a
subsequent behavior.
Subliminal cuing and unconscious priming influence numerous behaviors
unrelated to this book. People think potato chips taste better when hearing
crunching sounds. We like a neutral stimulus more if, just before seeing it, a
picture of a smiling face is flashed for a twentieth of a second. The more
expensive a supposed (placebo) painkiller, the more effective people report the
placebo to be. Ask subjects their favorite detergent; if they’ve just read a
paragraph containing the word “ocean,” they’re more likely to choose Tide—and
then explain its cleaning virtues.6
Thus, over the course of seconds sensory cues can shape your behavior
unconsciously.
A hugely unsettling sensory cue concerns race.7 Our brains are incredibly
attuned to skin color. Flash a face for less than a tenth of a second (one hundred
milliseconds), so short a time that people aren’t even sure they’ve seen
something. Have them guess the race of the pictured face, and there’s a better-
than-even chance of accuracy. We may claim to judge someone by the content of
their character rather than by the color of their skin. But our brains sure as hell
note the color, real fast.
By one hundred milliseconds, brain function already differs in two
depressing ways, depending on the race of the face (as shown with
neuroimaging). First, in a widely replicated finding, the amygdala activates.
Moreover, the more racist someone is in an implicit test of race bias (stay tuned),
the more activation there is.8
Similarly, repeatedly show subjects a picture of a face accompanied by a
shock; soon, seeing the face alone activates the amygdala.9 As shown by
Elizabeth Phelps of NYU, such “fear conditioning” occurs faster for other-race
than same-race faces. Amygdalae are prepared to learn to associate something
bad with Them. Moreover, people judge neutral other-race faces as angrier than
neutral same-race faces.
So if whites see a black face shown at a subliminal speed, the amygdala
activates.10 But if the face is shown long enough for conscious processing, the
anterior cingulate and the “cognitive” dlPFC then activate and inhibit the
amygdala. It’s the frontal cortex exerting executive control over the deeper,
darker amygdaloid response.
Second depressing finding: subliminal signaling of race also affects the
fusiform face area, the cortical region that specializes in facial recognition.11
Damaging the fusiform, for example, selectively produces “face blindness” (aka
prosopagnosia), an inability to recognize faces. Work by John Gabrieli at MIT
demonstrates less fusiform activation for other-race faces, with the effect
strongest in the most implicitly racist subjects. This isn’t about novelty—show a
face with purple skin and the fusiform responds as if it’s same-race. The
fusiform isn’t fooled—“That’s not an Other; it’s just a ‘normal’ Photoshopped
face.”
In accord with that, white Americans remember white better than black
faces; moreover, mixed-race faces are remembered better if described as being of
a white rather than a black person. Remarkably, if mixed-race subjects are told
they’ve been assigned to one of the two races for the study, they show less
fusiform response to faces of the arbitrarily designated “other” race.12
Our attunement to race is shown in another way, too.13 Show a video of
someone’s hand being poked with a needle, and subjects have an “isomorphic
sensorimotor” response—hands tense in empathy. Among both whites and
blacks, the response is blunted for other-race hands; the more the implicit
racism, the more blunting. Similarly, among subjects of both races, there’s more
activation of the (emotional) medial PFC when considering misfortune befalling
a member of their own race than of another race.
This has major implications. In work by Joshua Correll at the University of
Colorado, subjects were rapidly shown pictures of people holding either a gun or
a cell phone and were told to shoot (only) gun toters. This is painfully
reminiscent of the 1999 killing of Amadou Diallo. Diallo, a West African
immigrant in New York, matched a description of a rapist. Four white officers
questioned him, and when the unarmed Diallo started to pull out his wallet, they
decided it was a gun and fired forty-one shots. The underlying neurobiology
concerns “event-related potentials” (ERPs), which are stimulus-induced changes
in electrical activity of the brain (as assessed by EEG—electroencephalography).
Threatening faces produce a distinctive change (called the P200 component) in
the ERP waveform in under two hundred milliseconds. Among white subjects,
viewing someone black evokes a stronger P200 waveform than viewing
someone white, regardless of whether the person is armed. Then, a few
milliseconds later, a second, inhibitory waveform (the N200 component)
appears, originating from the frontal cortex—“Let’s think a sec about what we’re
seeing before we shoot.” Viewing a black individual evokes less of an N200
waveform than does seeing someone white. The greater the P200/N200 ratio
(i.e., the greater the ratio of I’m-feeling-threatened to Hold-on-a-sec), the greater
the likelihood of shooting an unarmed black individual. In another study subjects
had to identify fragmented pictures of objects. Priming white subjects with
subliminal views of black (but not white) faces made them better at detecting
pictures of weapons (but not cameras or books).14
Finally, for the same criminal conviction, the more stereotypically African a
black individual’s facial features, the longer the sentence.15 In contrast, juries
view black (but not white) male defendants more favorably if they’re wearing
big, clunky glasses; some defense attorneys even exploit this “nerd defense” by
accessorizing their clients with fake glasses, and prosecuting attorneys ask
whether those dorky glasses are real. In other words, when blind, impartial
justice is supposedly being administered, jurors are unconsciously biased by
racial stereotypes of someone’s face.
This is so depressing—are we hardwired to fear the face of someone of
another race, to process their face less as a face, to feel less empathy? No. For
starters, there’s tremendous individual variation—not everyone’s amygdala
activates in response to an other-race face, and those exceptions are informative.
Moreover, subtle manipulations rapidly change the amygdaloid response to the
face of an Other. This will be covered in chapter 11.
Recall the shortcut to the amygdala discussed in the previous chapter, when
sensory information enters the brain. Most is funneled through that sensory way
station in the thalamus and then to appropriate cortical region (e.g., the visual or
auditory cortex) for the slow, arduous process of decoding light pixels, sound
waves, and so on into something identifiable. And finally information about it
(“It’s Mozart”) is passed to the limbic system.
As we saw, there’s that shortcut from the thalamus directly to the amygdala,
such that while the first few layers of, say, the visual cortex are futzing around
with unpacking a complex image, the amygdala is already thinking, “That’s a
gun!” and reacting. And as we saw, there’s the trade-off: information reaches the
amygdala fast but is often inaccurate.16 The amygdala thinks it knows what it’s
seeing before the frontal cortex slams on the brakes; an innocent man reaches for
his wallet and dies.
Other types of subliminal visual information influence the brain.17 For
example, the gender of a face is processed within 150 milliseconds. Ditto with
social status. Social dominance looks the same across cultures—direct gaze,
open posture (e.g., leaning back with arms behind the head), while subordination
is signaled with averted gaze, arms sheltering the torso. After a mere 40-
millisecond exposure, subjects accurately distinguish high- from low-status
presentations. As we’ll see in chapter 12, when people are figuring out stable
status relations, logical areas of the frontal cortex (the vmPFC and dlPFC)
activate; but in the case of unstable, flip-flopping relations, the amygdala also
activates. It’s unsettling when we’re unsure who gets ulcers and who gives them.
There’s also subliminal cuing about beauty.18 From an early age, in both
sexes and across cultures, attractive people are judged to be smarter, kinder, and
more honest. We’re more likely to vote for attractive people or hire them, less
likely to convict them of crimes, and, if they are convicted, more likely to dole
out shorter sentences. Remarkably, the medial orbitofrontal cortex assesses both
the beauty of a face and the goodness of a behavior, and its level of activity
during one of those tasks predicts the level during the other. The brain does
similar things when contemplating beautiful minds, hearts, and cheekbones. And
assumes that cheekbones tell something about minds and hearts. This will be
covered in chapter 12.
Though we derive subliminal information from bodily cues, such as posture,
we get the most information from faces.19 Why else evolve the fusiform? The
shape of women’s faces changes subtly during their ovulatory cycle, and men
prefer female faces at the time of ovulation. Subjects guess political affiliation or
religion at above-chance levels just by looking at faces. And for the same
transgression, people who look embarrassed—blushing, eyes averted, face
angled downward and to the side—are more readily forgiven.
Eyes give the most information.20 Take pictures of two faces with different
emotions, and switch different facial parts between the two with cutting and
pasting. What emotion is detected? The one in the eyes.*21
Eyes often have an implicit censorious power.22 Post a large picture of a pair
of eyes at a bus stop (versus a picture of flowers), and people become more
likely to clean up litter. Post a picture of eyes in a workplace coffee room, and
the money paid on the honor system triples. Show a pair of eyes on a computer
screen and people become more generous in online economic games.
Subliminal auditory cues also alter behavior.23 Back to amygdaloid
activation in whites subliminally viewing black faces. Chad Forbes of the
University of Delaware shows that the amygdala activation increases if loud rap
music—a genre typically associated more with African Americans than with
whites—plays in the background. The opposite occurs when evoking negative
white stereotypes with death metal music blaring.
Another example of auditory cuing explains a thoroughly poignant anecdote
told by my Stanford colleague Claude Steele, who has done seminal research on
stereotyping.24 Steele recounts how an African American male grad student of
his, knowing the stereotypes that a young black man evokes on the genteel
streets of Palo Alto, whistled Vivaldi when walking home at night, hoping to
evoke instead “Hey, that’s not Snoop Dogg. That’s a dead white male composer
[exhale].”
No discussion of subliminal sensory cuing is complete without considering
olfaction, a subject marketing people have salivated over since we were
projected to watch Smell-O-Vision someday. The human olfactory system is
atrophied; roughly 40 percent of a rat’s brain is devoted to olfactory processing,
versus 3 percent in us. Nonetheless, we still have unconscious olfactory lives,
and as in rodents, our olfactory system sends more direct projections to the
limbic system than other sensory systems. As noted, rodent pheromones carry
information about sex, age, reproductive status, health, and genetic makeup, and
they alter physiology and behavior. Similar, if milder, versions of the same are
reported in some (but not all) studies of humans, ranging from the Wellesley
effect, discussed in the introduction, to heterosexual women preferring the smell
of high-testosterone men.
Importantly, pheromones signal fear. In one study researchers got armpit
swabs from volunteers under two conditions—either after contentedly sweating
during a comfortable run, or after sweating in terror during their first tandem
skydive (note—in tandem skydives you’re yoked to the instructor, who does the
physical work; so if you’re sweating, it’s from panic, not physical effort).
Subjects sniffed each type of sweat and couldn’t consciously distinguish
between them. However, sniffing terrified sweat (but not contented sweat)
caused amygdaloid activation, a bigger startle response, improved detection of
subliminal angry faces, and increased odds of interpreting an ambiguous face as
looking fearful. If people around you smell scared, your brain tilts toward
concluding that you are too.25
Finally, nonpheromonal odors influence us as well. As we’ll see in chapter
12, if people sit in a room with smelly garbage, they become more conservative
about social issues (e.g., gay marriage) without changing their opinions about,
say, foreign policy or economics.
Interoceptive Information
In addition to information about the outside world, our brains constantly
receive “interoceptive” information about the body’s internal state. You feel
hungry, your back aches, your gassy intestine twinges, your big toe itches. And
such interoceptive information influences our behavior as well.
This brings us to the time-honored James-Lange theory, named for William
James, a grand mufti in the history of psychology, and an obscure Danish
physician, Carl Lange. In the 1880s they independently concocted the same
screwy idea. How do your feelings and your body’s automatic (i.e.,
“autonomic”) function interact? It seems obvious—a lion chases you, you feel
terrified, and thus your heart speeds up. James and Lange suggested the
opposite: you subliminally note the lion, speeding up your heart; then your
conscious brain gets this interoceptive information, concluding, “Wow, my heart
is racing; I must be terrified.” In other words, you decide what you feel based on
signals from your body.
There’s support for the idea—three of my fa